what is apparent what is apparent it's
not an easy question today we have
adoption step families surrogate mothers
many parents face tough questions and
tough decisions shall we tell our child
about the sperm donation if so when what
words to use sperm donors are often
referred to as biological fathers but
should we really be using the word
father as a philosopher and social
scientists I have been studying these
questions about the concept of
Parenthood but today I will talk to you
about what I learned from talking to
parents and children I will show you
that they know what matters most in a
family even though their family looks a
little different I will show you their
creative ways of dealing with tough
questions but I will also show you the
parents uncertainties we interviewed
couples who received fertility
treatments at Ghent University Hospital
using sperm from a donor in this
treatment timeline you can see two
points at which we conducted interviews
we included heterosexual couples where
the man for some reason did not have
good quality sperm and lesbian couples
who obviously needed to find sperm
elsewhere we also included children I
wanted to know how those children define
concepts like Parenthood and family in
fact that is what I asked them only not
in that way
I drew an apple tree instead this way I
could ask abstract philosophical
questions in a way that did not make
them run off so as you can see the apple
tree is empty and that illustrates my
research approach by designing
techniques like this I can bring as
little as possible meaning and content
to the interview because I want to hear
that from them I asked them what would
your family look like if it were an
apple tree and they could take a paper
apple for everyone who in their view was
a member of the family write a name on
it and hang it wherever they wanted and
I would ask questions most children
started with a parent or a sibling one
started with boxer the dead dog of his
grandparents at this point none of the
children started mentioning the donor so
I asked him about their birth story I
said before you were born
it was just your mom and dad or mom and
mommy can you tell me how you came into
the family and they explained one said
my parents did not have good seeds but
they're friendly men out there who have
spare seeds they bring them to the
hospital and they put them in a big jar
my mummy went there and she took two
from the jar one for me and one for my
sister she put the seeds in her belly
somehow and her belly grew really big
and there I was hmm so only when they
started mentioning the donor I asked
questions about him using their own
words I said if this would be an apple
for the friendly man with the seeds what
would you do with it and one boy was
thinking out loud holding the Apple and
he said I won't put this one up there
with the others he's not part of my
family but I will not put him on the
ground that's too cold and too hard I
think he should be in the trunk because
he made my family possible if he would
not have done this that would really be
sad because my family would not be here
and I would not be here
so also parents constructed family tales
tales to tell their children one couple
explained donor insemination by taking
their children to a farm to watch a vet
inseminate cows and why not it's their
way of explaining their do-it-yourself
with family narratives DIY and we had
another couple who made books a book for
each child they were really works of
Arts containing their thoughts and
feelings throughout the treatment they
even had the hospital parking tickets in
there so it is DIY finding ways words
and images to tell your family story to
your child and these stories were highly
diverse but they all had one thing in
common it was a tale of longing for a
child and the quest for that child it
was about how special and how deeply
loved their child was and research so
far shows that these children are doing
fine
they do not have more problems than
other kids yet these parents also wanted
to justify their decisions through the
tales they tell they hope that their
children would understand their reasons
for making the family in this way
underlying was a fear that their
children might disapprove and would
reject the non-genetic parent and that
fear is understandable because we live
in a very heat room
normative and Ginetta sized society a
world that still believes that through
families consists of one mom one dad and
their genetically related children well
I want to tell you about a teenage boy
he was daughter conceived but not part
of our study and one day he had an
argument with his father and he yelled
you're telling me what to do you're not
even my father that was exactly what the
parents in our study feared now the boy
soon felt sorry and they made up but it
is the reaction of his father that is
most interesting he said this outburst
had nothing to do with the lack of a
genetic link it was about puberty being
difficult it's what they do at that age
it will pass what this man shows us is
that when something goes wrong we should
not immediately think it is because the
family is a little different these
things happen in all families and every
now and then all parents may wonder am i
a good enough parent these parents -
they above all wanted to do what's best
for their child but they also sometimes
wondered am i a real parent and their
uncertainties were present long before
they even were parents at the start of
treatments when they first saw the
counselor and they paid close attention
to the counselor because they wanted to
do it right even ten years later they
still remembered the advice they were
given they so when they thought about
the counselor and the advice they were
given we discussed that and we saw one
lesbian couple who said when our son
asks us do I have it dad
we will say no you do not have a dad but
we will say nothing more not unless he
asks because he might not be ready for
that the counselor said so well I don't
know that's quite different from how we
respond to children's questions like
milk is that made in a factory we will
say no it comes from cows and we will
talk about the farmer and the way the
milk ends up in the shop we will not say
no milk is not made in a factory
so something strange happened here and
of course these children noticed that so
one boy said I asked my parents loads of
questions but they acted really weird so
you know I have a friend at school and
she's made in the same way when I have a
question I just go and ask her clever
guy problem solved but his parents did
not notice and it certainly was not what
they had in mind nor what the counselor
had in mind when they were saying how
important it is to be an open
communication family and that's the
strange thing about advice when we offer
people pills we gather evidence first we
do tests we do follow-up studies we want
to know and rightly so
what this bill is doing and how it
affects people's lives and advice it is
not enough for advice or for
professionals to give advice that is
theoretically sound or well meant it
should be advice that where there is
evidence for evidence that it actually
improves patients lives
so the philosopher in me would now want
to offer you a paradox I advise you to
stop following advice but yes
I will not end here with what went wrong
I would not be doing justice to the
warmth we found in those families
remember the books and a trip to the
farmer when parents do things that work
for them they do brilliant things what I
want you to remember as members of
families in no matter what form or shape
is that what families need our warm
relationships and we do not need to be
professionals to create those most of us
do just fine although it may be hard
work and from time to time we can do
with some advice in that case bear in
mind three things work with advice that
works for your family remember you're
the expert because you live your family
life and finally believe in your
abilities and your creativity because
you can do it yourself thank you
you